Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence

Congestion Games for V2G-Enabled EV Charging
Benny Lutati1 , Vadim Levit1 , Tal Grinshpoun2 , Amnon Meisels1
1

Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Be’er-Sheva, Israel
2
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management
Ariel University, Ariel, Israel

Abstract

1973). A Congestion game consists of players and resources.
The cost of each resource depends on the number of players
that choose to use it. The overall cost of each player is simply the sum of the costs of all the resources that the player
selects to use. The connection to the charging of EVs is clear
– each player is an agent representing a single EV and the resources are the time-slots in which the agents are interested
in charging their batteries.
Congestion games are closely related to another important
class of games – potential games (Monderer and Shapley
1996). Particularly, Monderer and Shapley proved that every
congestion game is an exact potential game. In a potential
game there exists a global function (the potential function)
that coincides with the incentives of all the players. More
precisely, the set of pure-strategy Nash equilibria (PNE) in
a potential game is equivalent to the local minima of the potential function. Potential games, inherently including congestion games, become interesting when the potential function has some desirable global meaning. In such games the
actions of strategic, non-cooperative, players leads to a desirable global outcome.
The increasing popularity of GIVs introduces new opportunities to the EV charging/discharging domain. A GIV
parked for long periods of time could sell power back at peak
hours. Moreover, a fleet of cars, with heterogeneous parking
times, could balance its charging loads and avoid charging at
expensive peak hours. Consequently, GIVs create the need
for a new class of games that enable both charging and discharging of the EVs batteries. The original version of congestion games falls short of describing the desired class of
games, since Rosenthal only considered situations in which
players consume resources (Rosenthal 1973). Here, players
may also free up resources by discharging their batteries during some time-slots. To deal with this situation, a generalization of the congestion game model, that is termed here feedback congestion games, is introduced. The proposed generalization is shown formally to still satisfy the same connection to potential games as the original congestion games.
More precisely, it is proven in Section 3 that every feedback
congestion game is an exact potential game.
This is not the first time that a real-world problem motivates a generalization of congestion games. Liu, Ahmad,
and Wu (2009) define congestion games with resource reuse
(CG-RR), which include an interference set for each player.

A model of the problem of charging and discharging
electrical vehicles as a congestion game is presented. A
generalization of congestion games – feedback congestion games (FCG) – is introduced. The charging of gridintegrated vehicles, which can also discharge energy
back to the grid, is a natural FCG application. FCGs are
proven to be exact potential games and therefore converge to a pure-strategy Nash equilibrium by an iterated
better-response process. A compact representation and
an algorithm that enable efficient best-response search
are presented. A detailed empirical evaluation assesses
the performance of the iterated best-response process.
The evaluation considers the quality of the resulting solutions and the rate of convergence to a stable state. The
effect of allowing to also discharge batteries using FCG
is compared to scenarios that only include charging and
is found to dramatically improve the predictability of
the achieved solutions as well as the balancing of load.

1

Introduction

Electric Vehicles (EVs) are an important part of the
transition plan to a low carbon economy. New designs,
such as plug-in hybrid vehicles and range-extended electric vehicles, are part of the expected future automotive
DNA (Mitchell, Borroni-Bird, and Burns 2010). EVs need
to be charged daily. When parked during office hours, EVs
are expected to charge in a well-balanced pattern in order
to avoid overloading the smart grid (Gerding et al. 2011;
Vandael et al. 2011). EVs are expected to be parked a large
fraction of the working day and may be able to charge part
of the time and be used as storage (Kamboj et al. 2010).
Consequently, it has been proposed that EVs could sell part
of the energy stored in their batteries back to the grid. This
concept is termed Vehicle-to-Grid (V2G). In the following,
the term Grid-Integrated Vehicles (GIVs) will be used to describe EVs that support V2G sessions. Such vehicles may be
used to balance the load on the grid by charging when demand is low and selling power back to the grid (discharging)
when demand is high (Kempton and Tomić 2005b).
The present paper models the problem of charging (and
discharging) EVs as a congestion game (CG) (Rosenthal
Copyright c 2014, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1440

back home, for example). This pattern may lead to large
peaks, such that will have to be tackled by extending the
grid infrastructure which in turn will reduce or even dismiss
the positive effects on the environment (Stein et al. 2012;
Sovacool and Hirsh 2009).
One solution for the EVs charging problem is to try to
schedule the charging of EVs in a way that will reduce
the peaks and balance the load. This scheduling however
will have to take into consideration the fact that different consumers (EVs) may have different time constraints
and willingness to pay. Grid-Integrated Vehicles are a special kind of EVs that support Vehicle-to-Grid sessions. In
a V2G session a vehicle may sell power, stored in its
battery, back into the grid (Kempton and Letendre 1997;
Kempton and Tomić 2005a). Since most vehicles are parked
over 90% of the time (Kamboj et al. 2010), some GIVs that
have rather loose time constraints can sell energy stored in
their battery back to the grid and in this way help to serve
the charging needs of other, more tightly time-constrained,
GIVs. Doing so in a smart way can be beneficial both to the
GIVs owners and to the electrical grid operators. The GIV
owners are being paid for helping distribute the load; this
payment can then reduce the cost of the GIV charge.
Formally, the GIV charging problem takes the form
of the tuple < V, T, {lt }t∈T , {Sv }v∈V
>, where
V = {1, 2, . . . , n} is a set of vehicles (GIVs) and T is a set
of time-slots. For each time-slot t ∈ T one defines lt to be
the initial load on the power grid that exists as background
to the problem (e.g., by residential homes or industry). For
each v ∈ V , Sv ⊆ {charge, do-nothing, discharge}|T | is a
set of assignments of actions (a strategy) for the different
time-slots. Each assignment sv ∈ Sv encodes a valid combination of time-slots during which the GIV is available for
charge/discharge and that coincides with its owners preferences. Given this input, the goal is to find a schedule (or a
strategy profile) S = {s1 , s2 , . . . , sn }, such that it balances
the loads inflicted by the charging operations combined with
the initial background load {lt }t∈T .

Consequently, the cost of each user is a function of the number of interfering players. By using the CG-RR generalization, the authors were able to model the problem of resource
competition in wireless communication.
A closely related research (Ibars, Navarro, and Giupponi
2010) models a distributed demand-side management system using traditional congestion games that do not allow
selling power back to the grid. This research is similar to our
proposed method in its applicability to the smart grid. However, distributed demand side management is mainly considered for residual areas; in such areas, by using our proposed
generalization one can take advantages of micro-storage devices (Vytelingum et al. 2010; Voice et al. 2011).
Several game-theoretic approaches that rely on some central authority were recently proposed for the EV charging
domain. In the vehicle-to-aggregator interaction game (Wu,
Mohsenian-Rad, and Huang 2012) the aggregator controls
the prices for the nearest time-slot in a V2G setting in a
manner that enables achieving an optimal outcome for the
grid in a distributed fashion. A different approach uses iterative Boolean games to solve a simpler version of the charging problem (Levit, Grinshpoun, and Meisels 2013). There,
a principal manipulates the players into reaching a PNE in a
dichotomous manner, i.e., without involving prices and discharging. Although these approaches are decentralized, they
heavily rely on the involvement of a central entity, which is
not the case in the proposed method of the present paper.
An empirical evaluation of the performance of congestion games and their respective feedback congestion games
is presented. That is, the effect of allowing to also discharge
batteries is compared to situations which include charging
only scenarios. Both alternatives are also compared to a
naı̈ve approach in which each GIV starts charging at the moment it is connected to the grid. The evaluation considers the
quality of the resulting solutions and the number of rounds
until convergence. The experimentation of large problems
was possible by using a compact representation and a novel
algorithm that enable efficient best-response search.
The plan of the paper is as follows. The GIV charging
problem is introduced in Section 2. Potential and congestion
games, as well as the feedback congestion games generalization, are formally described in Section 3. The representation
of the GIV charging problem as a feedback congestion game
is presented in Section 4. A compact representation of the
problem and an algorithm for finding the best response are
introduced in Section 5. An extensive empirical evaluation
of the proposed games is in Section 6. Section 7 outlines our
conclusions and future work directions.

2

3

Potential and Congestion Games

The class of potential games is characterized as games that
admit a potential function on the joint strategy space, such
that the gradient of the potential function is the gradient
of the constituents’ private utility function (Monderer and
Shapley 1996). A potential function has a natural interpretation as representing opportunities for improvement to a
player that deviates from any given strategy profile (Chapman, Rogers, and Jennings 2008). A potential game with
I = {1, 2, . . . , n} players and a set of the available strategies for these players {Si }i∈I has several unique properties.

The GIV Charging Problem

Electric vehicles received a lot of attention in the recent
years. Generally, EVs are associated with their positive effects over the environment and especially low carbon emissions and noise reduction (Kemp et al. 2010). However,
their widespread use is also expected to place considerable
strains on existing electricity distribution networks. Moreover, many EVs are expected to be charged during the same
time phase (between the times that the majority of the population is driving to work and the time they are driving

1. The game has at least one PNE.
2. The local optima of the potential function are PNEs of the
game.
3. Given a strategy profile S = {s1 , s2 , . . . , sn } which is
a selection of strategies for each player in the game, an
improvement step of player i is a change of its strategy
from si to s0i , such that the utility ui : Si → R of

1441

player i increases. In potential games, sequences of improvement steps do not run into cycles. Such sequences
of improvement steps reach a PNE after a finite number
of steps (Monderer and Shapley 1996). This is sometimes
termed an iterated better-response process or the finite improvement property.

Definition 3 (Feedback Congestion Game). A feedback
congestion game is a tuple < I, T, {Si }i∈I , {ct }t∈T >,
where I = {1, 2, . . . , n} is a set of producer/consumer
players (henceforth termed agents); T is a set of congestible resources; each agent i ∈ I has a set of strategies
Si ⊆ {−1, 0, 1}|T | , each strategy si ∈ Si is an assignment
of resources usage – 0 means no use, 1 means consume, and
-1 means produce; and ct : N → R is a cost function associated with resource t ∈ T . The utility agent i has for selecting
strategy si is assumed to be proportional to
X
si [t] + 1
ui (si , s−i ) = −1 ·
si [t] · ct (dt +
) (4)
2

Definition 1 (exact potential game). A game is an exact
potential game if there exists a function Φ : S → R such
that for each player i and for any two strategies si , s0i ∈ Si
the following holds
ui (si , s−i ) − ui (s0i , s−i ) = Φ(si , s−i ) − Φ(s0i , s−i ) (1)

t∈T

where s−i = S \ {si } denotes the set of the selected strategies of every player except i.

Theorem 1. A feedback congestion game is an exact potential game.

The class of congestion games models scenarios in which
players use congestible resources (Rosenthal 1973). The
congestion level of resources is a function of the number of
players that use them. Our definition of the classical congestion game as given below, is slightly different yet equivalent
to the definition of Rosenthal (1973).

Proof. In order to show that a feedback congestion game
is an exact potential game one needs to provide a potential
function Φ : S → R that satisfies the condition of Equation 1. We will show that the potential function
Φ(si , s−i ) = −1 ·

Definition 2 (congestion game). A congestion game is a
tuple < I, T, {Si }i∈I , {ct }t∈T >, where I = {1, 2, . . . , n}
is a set of players, T is a set of congestible resources, Si ⊆
2|T | is the strategy space of player i, and ct : N → R is
a cost function associated with resource t ∈ T (Rosenthal
1973). The utility of a player for selecting a strategy si is
assumed to be proportional to
X
ui (si , s−i ) = −1 ·
si [t] · ct (dt + 1)
(2)

∀t ∈ T , si [t] · ct (dt +

si [t] + 1
s0 [t] + 1
) − s0i [t] · ct (dt + i
)
2
2
dt +s0i [t]

dt +si [t]

=

X

ct (x) −

X

ct (x)

x=1

x=1

(6)

In order to prove the correctness of Equation 6 one must
consider all possible cases. The same outcome results when
switching between the values of si [t] and s0i [t] (only the sign
may flip). In what follows we use the term without loss of
generality (w.l.o.g.) to refer to such cases.

It was proven that every congestion game in an exact potential game (Rosenthal 1973), since the following potential
function always holds:
ct (x)

(5)

achieves this objective.
Consider an agent i ∈ I and two arbitrary strategies
si , s0i ∈ Si . In order to prove that Equation 5 is an exact
potential function one must show that

where si [t] is 1 if the player consumes resource t when applying strategy si and 0 otherwise. dt denotes the congestion
over resource
t as can be deduced from s−i , and formally
P
dt = s∈s−i s[t].

Φ(S) = −1 ·

ct (x)

x=1

t∈T

t∈T

dt
XX

+si [t]
X dtX

Case 1. si [t] = s0i [t]. This is the trivial case, since both sides
of the equation are identically 0.

(3)

Case 2. w.l.o.g., si [t] = 1, s0i [t] = −1. Inserting these
values into Equation 6 results in the expression:

t∈T x=1

Feedback Congestion Games (FCGs)
Let us consider an extended definition of the classical congestion game (as described by Rosenthal). The extension is
termed feedback congestion game (FCG) and is defined to
be a game similar to the classical congestion game with the
exception that the players play the role of both producer and
consumer. This means that each player is able to produce
some resources and consume other resources.
A clear motivation for feedback congestion games is that
they naturally model the GIV charging problem; an EV can
choose to charge at one time-slot and to discharge at another.
It can do so in order to reduce the total cost of its charging
session and as a side effect it can also help balance the overall load.

ct (dt + 1) + ct (dt ) =

dX
t +1

ct (x) −

x=1

dX
t −1

ct (x)

x=1

This equality holds because it is an identity. It simply uses
the elimination of similar elements from the right-hand side
of the equation, resulting in its left-hand side.
Case 3. w.l.o.g., si [t] = 0, s0i [t] = −1. Inserting these values into both sides of Equation 6 simplifies it to:
ct (dt ) =

dt
X
x=1

ct (x) −

dX
t −1

ct (x)

x=1

The equality holds with the same justification as in Case 2.

1442

Case 4. w.l.o.g., si [t] = 0, s0i [t] = 1. Inserting these values
into both sides of Equation 6 simplifies it to:
−ct (dt + 1) =

dt
X
x=1

ct (x) −

dX
t +1

number of variables controlled by the agents. For a large
number of agents, as is the case in the GIV charging problem, the explicit representation is impractical. First, it needs
exponential space. Second, computing a best-response strategy requires accessing all the utility values at least once, and
hence would take exponential time.
While the above explicit representation yields exponential
complexity, a property of real-life charging scenarios comes
to our aid. Vehicle owners usually could not care less regarding some specific time-slots; rather, they want their EV to be
charged within some time interval in which the vehicle is
parked. This comprehension leads to a natural and remarkably compact representation.

ct (x)

x=1

Again, the resulting equality is trivially true for the same
reason as in the previous cases.
The fact that Equation 6 holds proves that Equation 5 is
indeed an exact potential function. This proves that every
feedback congestion game is an exact potential game.

4

Modeling GIV Charging as FCG

Scalability of Representation

Modeling the GIV charging problem as an FCG is straightforward. Let < V, T, {lt }, {Sv } > be an instance of the GIV
charging problem. Every vehicle v ∈ V can be represented
as an agent i ∈ I. The set of resources T in the FCG is
the set of time-slots. Finally, the set of available strategies
{Si } represents the set of available GIV actions {Sv }. In order to support the initial background load one can add several “pseudo-agents”, each with a single strategy, so that together they will impose the congestion defined in {lt }t∈T .
This modeling has several advantages:

Each agent (GIV) i ∈ I in the GIV charging problem has
a set of strategies that encode a valid combination of timeslots during which agent i is able to charge/discharge; these
strategies coincide with the vehicles owner’s preferences.
We assume that agent i is able to charge/discharge within
a time interval (ai , di ), where ai represents the arrival time
and di the departure time. The vehicle’s owner expects that
during this time interval the GIV will charge qi energy units.
This expectation enables to present the set of strategies Si of
agent i as a tuple < ai , di , qi >. One may also notice that in
the iterated best-response process an agent does not need to
know the strategies chosen by other agents (i.e., s−i ) in order
to calculate ui (si , s−i ), but only the congestion of time-slots
in the interval (ai , di ). These properties make the size of the
FCG representation size-scalable in the number of agents,
which is an important property in this domain. Moreover,
the proposed method for finding a PNE inherently preserves
the privacy of agents’ preferences.

1. Distributed iterated better-response playing is guaranteed
to converge to a PNE.
2. In order to compute its utility, an agent only needs to
know the congestion over the time-slots. The agent does
not need to know any additional information about any
other agent. This results in a compact representation of
the game and preservation of the privacy of agents.
3. Since each turn in the better-response process improves
the value of the potential function, one can execute this
process as a distributed anytime hill-climbing algorithm.

Finding Best Response

Given the above transformation, one can design appropriate pricing schemes. Pricing schemes are designed to
achieve global objectives which are inherent to issues of demand side management and the smart grid. Important examples are load balancing and peak reduction. The relevant
pricing scheme for achieving load balancing is based on
Shannon’s entropy (Shannon 1948). For achieving peak reduction, one can use a lexicographic-order pricing scheme.
More details on these pricing schemes are excluded due to
page limitation.

5

Running an iterated best (or better) response process requires numerous calculations of the best response for each
agent. The naı̈ve search process for the best response iterates over all the strategies available for the agent, and selects
the one that yields the maximal utility. Following the problem definition in Section 2, each agent i which is “active”
in time interval (ai , di ) has at most 3ti strategies, where
ti = di − ai . Iterating over all these strategies yields exponential run-time. For this setting, Algorithm 1 finds a bestresponse strategy in time O(ti · log(ti )), reducing the runtime of the best-response process.
The algorithm receives as input the agents’ preferences
and the current congestions d. The algorithm first sorts d
with respect to the costs and then finds the first qi minimalcost time-slots to charge in. Next, the algorithm tries to find
pairs of time-slots, such that charging in one and discharging
in the other yields a profit. The agent has to verify that the
battery is not already fully charged when charging, and that
it has enough power in the battery when discharging.

Representation and Runtime

In formal formats for specifying a game (Neumann and Morgenstern 1944; Kuhn, Arrow, and Tucker 1953) utility functions are represented explicitly by listing the values for each
agent and for each combination of actions. The number of
utility values that must be specified (i.e., the number of possible combinations of actions) is exponential in the number
of players. The actions available to the agents can be represented by a set of variables and their respective domains in
an Asymmetric Distributed Constraints Optimization Problem (Grinshpoun et al. 2013). This makes the utility functions exponential both in the number of agents and in the

Proposition 2. The run-time of Algorithm 1 is O(ti ·log(ti )).
Proposition 3. Algorithm 1 finds a best-response strategy.
The proofs are omitted due to page limitation.

1443

Algorithm 1 FindBestResponse (ai , di , qi , d)
1: Let tcharge ⊆ T be the set of time-slots in (ai , di ) ordered with respect to the cost of (congestion + 1)
2: Let tdischarge ⊆ T be the set of time-slots in (ai , di )
ordered with respect to the congestion cost
3: s ← 0T
4: for min(qi , ti ) times do
5:
find time-slot t ∈ tcharge with lowest cost s.t. s[t] = 0
6:
s[t] ← 1
7: while ∃t ∈ tcharge , t0 ∈ tdischarge s.t.
c(d[t0 ]) > c(d[t] + 1) and s[t] = 0 and s[t0 ] = 0 do
8:
s[t] ← 1
9:
s[t0 ] ← −1
10: return s

6

Congestion

We present the results of 200 randomly generated problems,
each with 500 agents and 200 time-slots. Figures 1, 2, and
3 show the average congestion over the time-slots that resulted from solving the generated problems using the fixed
pricing scheme, CG, and FCG, respectively. Presenting only
the mean values is not particularly informative in this context, since random values tend to average nicely. Thus, the
standard deviation is also shown.

Experimental Evaluation

250
230
210
190
170
150
130
110
90
70
50
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

180

200

Time-slot

In the following evaluation we generated a random set of
GIV charging problems. These problems were then translated to both congestion games (by ignoring strategies that
include discharging) and feedback congestion games. We
tested the effectiveness of the iterated best-response process
for both CG and FCG, as well as for a fixed pricing scheme.
For CG and FCG we used an entropy-based pricing scheme.

Background load

Fixed price load

Figure 1: Congestion over time-slots – Background vs.
Fixed pricing scheme
Figure 1 clearly shows that the demand when using the
fixed pricing scheme is highly unpredictable, in the sense
that the variance between problem instances corresponds to
the variance of the background load. This is not a desirable
property for both the electricity company and the consumers.
The electricity company needs to plan the power generation
in advance, whereas the consumers benefit from predictable
electricity costs. Note that the average over all experiments
maintains the locations of the background load peaks.

Problem Generation

Congestion

The problems used in this evaluation were randomly generated according to the following process. First, the number
of agents V and time-slots T were given to each experiment as parameters. Next, a background power load was randomly selected for each time-slot from the range [0, |V |/2].
Then, the EVs preferences were generated by randomly selecting the arrival and departure times (in the range [0, |T |]),
as well as the amount of energy units that each EV needs to
charge. This amount was defined by a natural number randomly selected from the range [0, 100]. All selections were
made with uniform distribution. Note that since EVs preferences are intervals, in the extreme time-slots (at the beginning and at the end), the resulting demand is not uniform.
Finally, the congestion game and corresponding feedback
congestion game that represent the generated GIV charging
problem were constructed according to the transformation
described in Section 4.

230
210
190
170
150
130
110
90
70
50
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

180

200

Time-slot
Background load

CG load

Figure 2: Congestion over time-slots – Background vs. CG

Solution Quality

The CG results in Figure 2 show some improvement in
their predictability (e.g., lower variance). Nevertheless, even
in the average case CG was not able to flatten the demand,
as the background load peaks still appear to some extent.
Considerable improvement is achieved when using FCG,
as can be clearly seen in Figure 3. In the time-slots that have
high GIV availability (roughly between time-slots 70 and
170), the average demand is virtually flattened. Moreover,
the demand in this region is highly predictable, demonstrating a small variance.

The first experiment is designed to test the quality of the solutions achieved by using iterated best-response for both the
congestion and feedback congestion games that correspond
to the generated GIV charging problems. We also included
in the experiment the results of a fixed pricing scheme in
which the price for each time-slot is the same and it is not
affected by the congestion over the time-slot; this pricing
scheme corresponds to the naı̈ve approach in which each
GIV starts charging at the moment it is connected to the grid.
The motivation for this experiment stems from the fact
that CG/FCG may include many different PNEs; while an
iterated best-response process is guaranteed to find one of
them, the quality of the found PNE may be far from optimal.

Load Balancing
The second experiment is designed to measure the effect that
the amount of consumers has on the resulting demand. The

1444

Congestion

agents use congested time-slots, therefore lowering their
costs may lead to faster convergence.
Figure 5 presents the number of rounds until convergence
for CG and FCG when using each of the two player orderings (same settings).

230
210
190
170
150
130
110
90
70
50

6
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

180

200

5

Background load

Rounds

Time-slot
FCG load

3

Figure 3: Congestion over time-slots – Background vs. FCG

2

Average standard deviation

objective is to achieve a balanced load among the time-slots,
thus we measure the standard deviation of the resulting congestion over all the time-slots.
For this experiment we considered problems of different
sizes, in which the number of consumers is taken from the
set {100, 200, . . . , 1000}. The number of time-slots remains
fixed (200) for all problems. For each problem size we generated 200 random instances. The values presented in Figure 4 are the averages for each problem size of the resulting
standard deviations.

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

CG

300

400

500

Expensive first (CG)
Expensive first (FCG)

600

700

800

900

1000

Round-robin (CG)
Round-robin (FCG)

Figure 5: Rounds until convergence
For the “Round-robin” ordering CG is shown to converge
faster than FCG. This result is not surprising since in FCG
each player has more strategies, which leads to a larger solution space. As expected, the “Expensive first” ordering resulted in considerably faster convergence for FCG.
From the graph it is clear that the proposed solution scales
well, although one must keep in mind that as the problem
size grows, so does the number of turns in each round.
In most cases the different orderings converged to the
same PNE. On the rare occasions that they converged to different PNEs, the changes in solution quality were marginal.

7

1000

Number of consumers
Fixed

200

Number of consumers

160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
100

4

Conclusions

The problem of V2G-enabled EV charging and discharging is modeled as a congestion game. In order to incorporate the discharge operation, a generalized model of congestion games is proposed. The resulting feedback congestion
games (FCGs) were proven to be exact potential games, as
is the case with standard congestion games. Being a potential game, FCGs converge to a PNE by an iterated betterresponse process. This property along with an extremely
compact representation that is presented, enable efficient
better-response search for a PNE.
An extensive experimental evaluation demonstrates that
the proposed model and its compact representation yield a
highly effective and scalable process. The experiments also
revealed that enabling the discharging operation (by using
FCGs) results in considerably better outcomes in terms of
their predictability as well as in the balance of loads that are
imposed on the different time-slots.
In the present work, the best-response process is completely sequential. In future work it would be interesting
to devise an algorithm in which all the agents act concurrently. Another interesting direction is to adjust the proposed
scheme in order to enable an online mechanism, in which
agents can come and go at any time (Gerding et al. 2011;
Robu et al. 2011; Stein et al. 2012). Finally, the V2Gcharging/discharging domain is an interesting playground
for semi-cooperative agents, which may lead to more effective schemes.

FCG

Figure 4: Load balancing between time-slots
It is clear that the results of the fixed pricing scheme are
not affected by the number of consumers. This is expected,
since the fixed pricing scheme basically amplifies the background load. In Contrast, when the number of consumers
increases, both CG and FCG are able to produce much more
balanced solutions. The ability of FCG to utilize V2G enables it to achieve considerably more balanced solutions
than those achieved by CG.

Scalability and Player Ordering
To verify the scalability of the proposed solution we examine the number of turns until the players converge to a PNE.
In each turn exactly one player is allowed to change its strategy or remain with its former strategy. For a problem with
n consumers, the process is considered converged after n
consecutive turns with no strategy changes.
Different player orderings may potentially affect the number of turns until convergence. The basic ordering, which
was also used in the preceding experiments, is “Roundrobin”, in which the same (random) ordering is used in each
round. Another player ordering that we consider is “Expensive first”, in which the order changes each round according to the agents’ costs in the previous round. “Expensive”

1445

Acknowledgments

Neumann, J. V., and Morgenstern, O. 1944. Theory of games
and economic behavior. Princeton University Press.
Robu, V.; Stein, S.; Gerding, E. H.; Parkes, D. C.; Rogers,
A.; and Jennings, N. R. 2011. An online mechanism for
multi-speed electric vehicle charging. In AMMA, 100–112.
Rosenthal, R. W. 1973. A class of games possessing purestrategy nash equilibria. International Journal of Game Theory 2(1):65–67.
Shannon, C. E. 1948. A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell System Technical Journal 27:379–423,
623–656.
Sovacool, B. K., and Hirsh, R. F. 2009. Beyond batteries:
An examination of the benefits and barriers to plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs) and a vehicle-to-grid (V2G)
transition. Energy Policy 37(3):1095–1103.
Stein, S.; Gerding, E.; Robu, V.; and Jennings, N. R. 2012.
A model-based online mechanism with pre-commitment and
its application to electric vehicle charging. In AAMAS, 669–
676.
Vandael, S.; Boucké, N.; Holvoet, T.; De Craemer, K.; and
Deconinck, G. 2011. Decentralized coordination of plug-in
hybrid vehicles for imbalance reduction in a smart grid. In
AAMAS, 803–810.
Voice, T.; Vytelingum, P.; Ramchurn, S. D.; Rogers, A.;
and Jennings, N. R. 2011. Decentralised control of microstorage in the smart grid. In AAAI, 1421–1427.
Vytelingum, P.; Voice, T. D.; Ramchurn, S. D.; Rogers, A.;
and Jennings, N. R. 2010. Agent-based micro-storage management for the smart grid. In AAMAS, 39–46.
Wu, C.; Mohsenian-Rad, H.; and Huang, J. 2012. Vehicleto-aggregator interaction game. Smart Grid, IEEE Transactions on 3(1):434–442.

The paper is in the frame of the project: Diffusion of Mass EMobility and Integrating Renewable Energy in Smart Grids
and Cities: Intelligent Agents for Efficient Energy Consumption, funded by the Israeli Ministry of Energy and Water. The
research was partially supported by the Lynn and William
Frankel Center for Computer Science at Ben-Gurion University.

References
Chapman, A.; Rogers, A.; and Jennings, N. R. 2008. A
parameterisation of algorithms for distributed constraint optimisation via potential games. In DCR workshop, 99–113.
Gerding, E. H.; Robu, V.; Stein, S.; Parkes, D. C.; Rogers,
A.; and Jennings, N. R. 2011. Online mechanism design for
electric vehicle charging. In AAMAS, 811–818.
Grinshpoun, T.; Grubshtein, A.; Zivan, R.; Netzer, A.; and
Meisels, A. 2013. Asymmetric distributed constraint optimization problems. J. Artif. Intell. Res. (JAIR) 47:613–647.
Ibars, C.; Navarro, M.; and Giupponi, L. 2010. Distributed
demand management in smart grid with a congestion game.
In SmartGridComm, 495–500.
Kamboj, S.; Pearre, N.; Kempton, W.; Decker, K.; Trnka,
K.; and Kern, C. 2010. Exploring the formation of electric
vehicle coalitions for vehicle-to-grid power regulation. In
ATES workshop.
Kemp, R.; Blythe, P.; Brace, C.; James, P.; Parry-Jones, R.;
Thielens, D.; Thomas, M.; Wenham, R.; and Urry, J. 2010.
Electric vehicles: charged with potential. Royal Academy
of Engineering.
Kempton, W., and Letendre, S. E. 1997. Electric vehicles
as a new power source for electric utilities. Transportation
Research Part D: Transport and Environment 2(3):157–175.
Kempton, W., and Tomić, J. 2005a. Vehicle-to-grid power
fundamentals: calculating capacity and net revenue. Journal
of Power Sources 144(1):268–279.
Kempton, W., and Tomić, J. 2005b. Vehicle-to-grid power
implementation: From stabilizing the grid to supporting
large-scale renewable energy. Journal of Power Sources
144(1):280–294.
Kuhn, H.; Arrow, K.; and Tucker, A. 1953. Contributions to
the theory of games. Number v. 2 in Annals of mathematics
studies. Princeton University Press.
Levit, V.; Grinshpoun, T.; and Meisels, A. 2013. Boolean
games for charging electric vehicles. In IAT, volume 2, 86–
93.
Liu, M.; Ahmad, S. H. A.; and Wu, Y. 2009. Congestion games with resource reuse and applications in spectrum
sharing. In GameNets, 171–179.
Mitchell, W. J.; Borroni-Bird, C. E.; and Burns, L. D. 2010.
Reinventing the automobile: Personal urban mobility for the
21st century. MIT Press.
Monderer, D., and Shapley, L. S. 1996. Potential games.
Games and economic behavior 14(1):124–143.

1446

